Nice crowd.
I'm Tim Hatcher.
I'm an engineer on the
Safari and WebKit team.
And I'm going to be
presenting with Adam Roben,
who's going to come on stage
later during the presentation.
So you're here to hear about
debugging websites using Safari's
Integrated Developer Tools.
And how many of you have
used debugging tools that are
available in other browsers?
So we have a lot of web developers,
it seems.
How many of you are familiar with
Safari's current developer tools?
Great, that's good to see.
And one last question.
How many of you have downloaded
a WebKit nightly build?
Great.
Keep doing that.
So when you're making a website,
you're going to use a lot of these
different web development tools,
from a text editor that does
basic syntax highlighting,
all the way to a full-featured
IDE like Coda or Dashcode.
And some of you have probably
even written some of these
apps that I have up here.
But there's always something
that's missing when you're
using one of these apps.
And that's the browser.
There's always a need to use the browser.
You're always going to need
to see exactly what the user
is going to look at your site,
exactly how it's going to look.
So hopefully that's
Safari for every one of you.
And hopefully you're targeting Safari,
developing apps for Safari,
and users tell us they love using Safari.
They love Safari for its great
user experience and great feel.
And we've heard in the past that
developers are using other browsers
because they like the tools.
Well, we've changed that.
We've drastically increased our tools
that we have available in Safari.
So hopefully the same browser
that your users are using,
you can be using to
develop your websites with.
[Transcript missing]
Once you turn this on,
you get a menu that looks
something like this.
And the menu's changed a little
bit in Safari 4 Developer Preview.
And there's a couple new items
that we're going to talk about
later in the presentation.
But first I'm going to talk
about this first group of items.
This group is about
browser interoperability.
And what's browser interoperability?
Well, if you're a web developer,
you already know.
Your page has to work in other browsers.
You're developing your website to
web standards and you want to test
between all the browsers to make
sure these standards work exactly
how you think in all the browsers.
So the first item does
exactly what it's titled.
It opens the page with whatever
browser you select from this menu.
So it'll open in Firefox or Opera and
tell that browser to open to that
URL that you're currently viewing.
So it's great to jump back and
forth between Safari and the
other browsers to test your page.
[Transcript missing]
So you can type whatever you want here.
And Safari will send this user agent
string to the server and post it to
your scripts available until you close
the window or change the user agent
back to the default or some other item.
So now let's talk about
the Snippet Editor.
I'm skipping over the other
items that we're going to talk
about later in the presentation.
So the snippet editor I love using.
And I hope you guys really take advantage
of the snippet editor and its power
to let you quickly and easily test
WebKit and use your HTML snippets and
ideas that you might brainstorm in
the shower in the morning or something.
So you have this idea of this CSS style
and you want to try it out real quick.
Well,
I hate creating test.html or test.html42
all over my hard drive and all over
my desktop and just to test out a
short little thing that Dave Hyatt
just blogged about on the WebKit blog.
So I can fire up the nightly build,
open up the snippet editor,
type in some HTML and see
it update live right in the
snippet editor as I'm typing.
So you can quickly and easily change
different... Try different tags,
try anything you want,
anything that you can
render as a web page,
you can type in here and see exactly
as you want it in the preview pane.
So that's the snippet editor.
And I'm skipping over
the other two items,
but let's talk about the disable items.
This is the bulk of the menu.
There's a lot of things you
can disable in a web browser.
And some of your users are gonna
have some of these items disabled.
Maybe JavaScript,
some of the other things we
don't expose to the user,
but are available to you to disable to
test different code paths and different
scenarios that other users from different
browsers might actually experience.
And they're good for
testing other things.
So what are they good for testing?
Well, the caches, you can disable all
of the browser caches.
Browsers have many caches.
There's the back-forward cache,
there's the disk cache,
there's the memory cache,
there's the application cache,
there's all sorts of caches.
While testing networking loading,
you don't want to ever get the cache.
You always want to get your
resources over the network.
So disabling the cache is good for that.
And other situations where
you're updating your site live,
you're uploading new
versions every two seconds,
and you want to make sure you're
always getting that fresh version.
I hate when it's 3 a.m.
and I'm working on a site and
I upload a resource and I reload the
browser and things don't work and it
turns out the browser is still using
the last version and I've spent
an hour trying to figure it out.
So that's why you want
to disable the caches.
And we've heard a lot of feedback
of people want to do this,
so this was added for you.
Amen.
Images, Styles, and JavaScript.
You can already disable JavaScript from
the security preferences,
I believe, in Safari.
And we want to give you, the developer,
quick access to that so you
can quickly disable JavaScript,
test your site,
make sure it's going to work for those
users that are paranoid and want to
keep JavaScript off for some reason.
I don't know how they get around the
web nowadays with JavaScript disabled,
but it's always good to test, right?
And there's always browsers
that don't support JavaScript,
so you want to test those cases.
Then there's testing semantic markup.
That's the popular trend now,
is separating presentation from style.
Or, not presentation from style,
that's the same thing, right?
Separating content from style.
So,
you can easily disable the style sheet.
And when you choose this item,
it turns off all the author style
sheets and all of the user style sheets.
So, you'll see exactly what your
HTML markup will look like,
say, in like a text browser like
links or something like that.
Then there's the runaway
JavaScript timer.
And you might not know what the
runaway JavaScript timer is.
You might not have experienced it before.
Hopefully you haven't.
And that means websites are doing the
right thing and not hogging the user
experience with long-running scripts.
But sometimes you need to debug or test
out a script that runs for many seconds.
And
[Transcript missing]
We would always just let the
JavaScript do whatever they want.
And users would get the beach
ball or things like that.
So in Safari,
we've added a dialogue that comes
up for the user that lets the user
interrupt the script in case the
site has gone off the deep end.
And the user needs a
way to exit the script.
Otherwise, they're going to have
to force quit Safari.
And we never want that, right?
But there's cases where you,
the developer, need to test your scripts,
figure out why this script
has gone off the deep end.
And you want to see if it actually
ever ends or if it's an infinite loop.
So you can just disable this timer,
and you'll never see the
dialogue as a developer.
So that's the disable
items of the develop menu.
Now I'm going to invite Adam on stage,
and he's going to talk to
you about the Web Inspector.
Thanks, Tim.
So I am Adam Roben.
I'm another engineer on
the Safari and WebKit team,
and I'm going to be talking to you today,
and Tim is also going to be
talking to you for the rest of the
session about the Web Inspector.
This is one of our main web
development tools in Safari.
It was first introduced in Safari 3.0,
although it was hidden inside a hidden
menu that you couldn't get to without
running some script on the command line.
In Safari 3.1,
it was promoted to the Develop menu,
which Tim already showed
you how to turn on.
And now,
in the Safari 4 developer preview,
we've really enhanced our existing
features and added a lot of great
new features based on the feedback
we've gotten from all of you.
So we'd really like you
all to check it out,
and I'm going to give you
a little overview of it.
But first of all,
how do we get to the Inspector?
Well, as Tim said,
you can get to it from the Develop menu.
Also,
when you have the Develop menu enabled,
anytime you right-click
or control-click on a web,
you'll get this extra context
menu item called Inspect Element,
which will bring up the
Inspector and focus it on whatever
element you clicked in the page.
And once you do one of these things,
you're going to see the brand-new,
redesigned Web Inspector that's included
in the Safari 4 developer preview.
And it looks like this.
[Transcript missing]
So I'm going to give you an
overview of the three main
parts of the Web Inspector.
First, at the top of the window,
you can see that we have a toolbar
that lets you access the five different
panels that break the Inspector up.
Each of these panels is designed to let
you focus on a particular debugging task.
Down at the bottom of the window is
an interactive JavaScript console
where you can enter JavaScript and
have it evaluated live at any time.
And the third main part
of the Web Inspector is
not in the window at all.
It's an API for your website to use
to provide you with detailed debugging
information and functionality.
So first, let's go through the panels.
And the first one is called Elements.
And this is what it looks like.
Now,
this may look pretty familiar to you if
you've used the Web Inspector before.
The main feature of it is a
DOM tree on the left side.
On the right is style information for the
element that's selected in the DOM tree.
And down at the bottom of the window is
a breadcrumb that shows you where in the
tree the selected element is located.
The next panel is called Resources,
and it looks like this.
And now this may also look familiar to
you if you ever used the network view of
previous versions of the Web Inspector.
You see here on the right,
we have a graph showing you the
loading profile of your web page.
Up at the top is a summary
graph that also shows you
information about the data loaded.
And on the left side is a list of all
the resources that your page loaded.
If you click on any one of these,
you'll see either the textual
source for the resource,
if it was something like a document
or a JavaScript file or a style sheet.
And if you click on an image
resource or a font resource,
you'll see a preview right
in the resources panel.
Now the next panel is something entirely
new to the Safari 4 Developer Preview.
It's called Scripts,
and this is what it looks like.
This is the home to our new
integrated JavaScript debugger,
which Tim is going to tell
you a lot more about later.
The panel after scripts is also new
in the Safari for Developer Preview.
It's called Profiles, and here it is.
Now, this exposes some new functionality
that we've built right into WebKit's
JavaScript engine that lets you
profile your JavaScript source
code and see the fastest functions,
the slowest functions,
and figure out where your page is
spending time when it's executing script.
The final panel you may have seen a
little bit of if you were here in the
previous session about offline data,
and that's the Databases panel.
This was also in Safari 3.1.
Now this lets you get at the
HTML5 client-side database
storage that WebKit supports.
And this is a way for you to
store structured data persistently
on the user's computer.
It's a new feature of the
upcoming HTML5 standard,
and it's fully supported in WebKit.
On the left, we have a list of all of the
databases that your page opened,
and each of the tables that each
of those databases contains.
When you have a database selected,
as we currently do in this screenshot,
you are shown a query view where
you can enter SQL queries and have
them evaluated live against the
database that you've selected.
And if you select one of the tables,
you'll see a database browser,
a table browser that will show you
all of the data in the database,
all the columns and all the rows
and all the data in the cells.
So those are the inspector's panels.
The next thing I want to
talk to you about is the
interactive JavaScript console.
Now the console is a very useful thing,
so we want to enable you
to get to it at any time.
So no matter where you
are in the inspector,
at any moment,
you can click on the show console
button down in the status bar,
or you can press the escape
key to bring up the console.
And up it will come,
and right away you can start entering
JavaScript expressions and evaluating
them right in the inspector as if
they were being evaluated in the page.
Now two new features to the console in
the Safari for Developer Preview are
tab completion and auto completion,
which makes it really easy to type
in long JavaScript expressions.
So the final part of the inspector
that I mentioned before is
the API for your sites to use.
And this is exposed through
the window.console object.
Now the window.console object has been
available in Safari for quite some time,
but we've recently made some big
improvements and added a lot of
new functionality to it to make
it even more useful for your site.
The console object has methods for
debugging logging and assertions and
for starting and stopping profiles.
And all of this information appears right
in the inspector where you can see it
while debugging the rest of your website.
And I should also note that
we've taken care to make sure
that all of our console API is
completely compatible with Firebug.
So if your site is already
coded to use Firebug,
it'll work right away in the inspector
without you having to change a thing.
Thank you.
So those are the three main
parts of the Inspector.
Now, at this point,
you might be thinking to yourself,
you know,
this Inspector thing sounds like
it's pretty useful and pretty cool,
you know, but I have a WebKit application
that has a lot of web content in it,
and I want to be able to use the
Inspector to debug that content.
Or maybe you're thinking that you're
a web developer and you try to always
stay on top of the latest standards
and technologies in the web world,
and these things move pretty fast,
and you don't want to have to wait
for a new version of Safari to be
released just so you can try out
the new features in the Inspector to
support these new technologies.
Or maybe if you're my
favorite kind of developer,
and maybe you're at the
WebKit party if you're like this,
you were thinking, boy,
I have some really great ideas
for how to make this inspector
so much better than before,
and I want to implement them myself.
Well,
if you're thinking any of these things,
you're in luck, because the inspector
is not a Safari feature.
It's actually a WebKit feature.
It's included in the WebKit framework,
and it's part of the
WebKit open source project.
This means that on any day, at any time,
you can download the very latest version
of WebKit using a WebKit nightly build
from nightly.webkit.org and try out
the latest version of the inspector
with all of its newest features.
You can also file bugs on the inspector
about new features that you would like
or things that aren't working quite
the way you would expect at our public
Bugzilla database at bugs.webkit.org.
And finally,
you can check out and build the code
yourself from our public subversion
repository at svn.webkit.org.
And if you're a web developer,
you can download the
inspector from the webkit.org.
And get started right away making changes
to the inspector and improvements.
And the inspector is written almost
entirely using web technologies.
That means it's written using HTML, CSS,
and JavaScript.
The entire user interface is this way.
And so it's really easy to get
started if you're a web developer
making changes to the inspector.
So that's pretty much
it for the inspector.
Now you have an overview of what's there.
And now we're going to move
into the first of the more
practical sessions of this talk.
So first we're going to talk
about finding and fixing
content and layout errors.
So what do we mean when
we're talking about content?
Well, really there are two types of
content that we're concerned with.
There is your page's style and
appearance and your page's markup.
First, we're going to talk about
the style and appearance.
But, you know,
we've shown you a lot of slides and
you're probably a little anxious to see
how this whole inspector thing works,
so we're going to go straight to a demo.
So here we are.
We've just installed our developer DVD,
and I'm going to open up Safari.
And turn on the web inspector.
So as Tim said,
you just go to Safari's preferences and
in the advanced pane of the preferences,
there's a checkbox, show develop menu.
So I'm going to check that and
you'll see up in the menu bar,
the develop menu appears
right next to the window menu.
And now I have access to all of those
features that Tim was talking about,
the user agent menu, the open page width,
and the ways to get to
the inspector itself.
So, if you were here in the
offline data session,
you probably saw a pretty
cool web calendar demo,
and we're going to use that a
little more in this session.
So let's open that up.
So here it is.
We've entered a bunch of events here,
and all of our data is being
loaded off of a SQL database,
off of the local disk,
and it's really pretty useful.
But you might notice that we have some
scroll bars here that seem to be kind
of obscuring our content and making it
a little hard to see what's going on.
So I'm going to choose to inspect
right here by right-clicking and
choosing Inspect Element to see what
the inspector can tell me about the
style in this area that might be
causing these scroll bars to appear.
So if I choose Inspect Element,
the inspector comes up and it
puts me right in the Elements
panel and selects the element that
I was clicking on in the page.
Now you can see over on the
right here in the Styles pane,
the first item is called
the Computed Style.
This is the style that the element
is being rendered with on the page.
And if you scroll down a little farther,
you can see all of the CSS rules
that we declared in our style
sheets and that the browser applies
automatically and how these were built
up to obtain that computed style.
So I'm going to collapse the computed
style for a moment and look mostly at
the style sheet that we've created here.
Now I can see that we
have an overflow rule.
Now overflow is a property that controls
what happens when content extends
outside of the element containing it.
It can turn on and off scroll bars
and make them appear only when needed.
And so this seems probably like the
place we need to look to figure out
what's going on with these scroll bars.
Now here we have auto set,
which means that when
the content is too big,
scroll bars should appear.
And when it's not too big,
they shouldn't.
Now I'm going to try just removing
the overflow property entirely,
just to see if Safari's defaults
give me the appearance I want.
You can edit any CSS in the
inspector in the styles pane
just by double clicking on it.
And this brings up an edit field.
You can select any text and delete it.
And I'm going to try just deleting
all of the text in the rule and
hitting enter to commit that.
So when I hit enter,
you can see that in the page,
the styles updated live.
Now the scroll bars did go away,
but I think now we have a problem
that's a little bit different,
which is that our data is now extending
into the following days on the calendar.
So this doesn't seem quite what we want.
So maybe we should try
a few other properties,
values for the overflow property.
Now it looks like here we're extending
a lot in the vertical direction.
So I'm going to try
modifying overflow Y first,
which controls just that direction.
And if you want to add a new property,
you can just double click on any existing
property and start typing right now,
overflow Y.
And then you can see that the
data is now extending into the
following days on the calendar.
So I'm going to try to do that.
So I'm going to type overflow Y hidden.
Now I think that this will
fix some of our issues.
And sure enough, it did.
Now we're not extending in
the Y direction anymore,
but we still do seem to have a
horizontal scroll bar on some days.
So to get rid of that,
we're going to do the
same thing for overflow X.
So I'll double click and
type in the property I want.
And then I'm going to type
in the property I want.
And when I hit enter, the styles update,
and now it looks like our
problem has been fixed.
So you can see how the inspector
makes it really easy to update styles
live in the page and experiment
around with different looks.
Now, of course, if we want this data to
go live to our users,
we'll have to make the same edits in the
source file and upload it to our server.
The edits that we make here are just
modifying the live representation
of the page in the browser.
So can we go back to slides, please?
So that's how to find
and fix layout errors.
And now let's talk about the
other part of content errors
that I mentioned before,
which are markup errors.
Now there are two main
kinds of markup errors.
The first kind are syntax errors.
This is when you have content that
is just not valid HTML syntax at all.
One example of this
would be misnested tags.
If you have tags that are opening
and closing in the wrong order,
then this is one kind of syntax
error that you'll encounter.
Another kind of syntax error
is to have extra closing tags.
In general, you're supposed to have one
opening tag for each closing tag.
And so if these opening tags and
closing tags don't match up in number,
then you have some extra tags
that you'll need to get rid of.
Markup Error #2:
Non-conforming content This is
content that is syntactically valid,
but doesn't conform to the HTML standard.
To even recognize one of
these kinds of errors,
you have to have your head really
deep in the HTML standard and know
all of the different rules in it.
One example of an error like this is
when you have a tag that's placed in
an area that HTML says is not allowed.
For example, here we have a form tag
that's a child of a table tag.
And while this is
syntactically valid HTML,
the HTML specification
says it's not allowed.
Now to find these errors in the past,
either you had to just
know what they were,
like I said,
or you had to use some external
tools such as an HTML validator.
And these other tools are very useful,
but they can't tell you what the browser
will actually do when it finds it.
And it's an external tool that
you have to use in addition to
everything else that you're already
using to debug your website.
So a new feature in the WebKit engine
that's built right in is the ability
to find and identify and explain
these errors to you and tell you
what WebKit does in response to them.
And this is all exposed
through the inspector.
So let's see how we might use this.
So here we have a page
that we're inspecting.
We opened up the inspector
and loaded the page,
and we're looking at the DOM tree.
Now you can notice that
down in the bottom right,
we have this little error count.
If you're a user of Xcode,
this will look very familiar to you.
It shows you compiler errors
and warnings in the same place.
So here the inspector is telling us
that we have three errors in our page.
And if we click on that error count,
the console will appear with a
listing of all of those errors.
Now next to each error is a hyperlink
that takes you right to the source file
and source line where the error occurred.
So if you click on one of those,
we'll move over to the resources panel.
And the resource where the
error occurred will be selected,
so you can see its source.
And the line where the error
occurred will be highlighted,
so you can find it right away.
Now you can see that we've also
inserted these red error bubbles to
show you the errors right in line and
all the context that surrounds them.
So this makes it very easy to see
where the errors are occurring
and to get a handle on them.
and what's going on.
So let's look at the
very first error here.
Often these kinds of content errors,
the markup errors,
will cascade and cause many other
errors farther down the line.
So it's good to focus
on the first ones first.
So the first error we have here says,
XML self-closing tag syntax
used on the anchor element.
This tag will not be closed.
So you may not be able to see
this in the screenshot here.
So here's a larger version of the
markup that is being talked about.
Here we have an anchor element,
and on the right edge of it,
you can see that we have a
forward slash just preceding
the closing right angle bracket.
Now this syntax is valid in XML,
but is not valid in HTML.
And so WebKit is telling you
that since this is HTML content,
this tag actually won't be closed at all,
and the tag will remain open.
So it turns out that this error is
actually causing all of the errors
that we're seeing on this page.
And so the other errors here are
saying that an anchor element is
misnested or not properly closed.
Which is the case here.
It's cloning the anchor element in order
to preserve the styles applied by it.
So this is something that web browsers
have to do when they encounter misnested
or not properly closed content,
just to make your page look the way
you might expect it to from the markup.
And you can see the effect
of this here in the DOM tree.
It turns out that this anchor
element has actually been cloned
into two other places in the DOM.
And in some cases,
it even has child elements, child nodes.
Now these are real nodes.
They're not just something that
we're showing you in the inspector.
They're actually in the DOM.
And this will even affect scripts
that are running on your page.
For example, if we use the inspector's
console to find out how many
anchor elements are on the page,
it'll tell us that there are four,
even though in our original source code,
we only had two.
So these two cloned elements really do
exist and they can trip up your page.
So how can we fix this?
Well,
WebKit has already told us that we're
using an XML self-closing tag syntax,
and so all we have to do
is get rid of that syntax.
So here again is the self-closing syntax,
and to turn this into
syntactically valid HTML,
all we have to do is remove the forward
slash and place a closing tag after it.
And so if we make this change in
our source and upload it to the
server again and reload the page,
then you can see that
down in the bottom right,
we don't have any errors anymore.
The source code doesn't have
any error bubbles in it,
and if we go over to the elements
panel and look at the DOM tree,
we don't have any cloned
anchor elements anymore.
The DOM looks just like we would
expect from the source of the page.
So the inspector makes it really,
really easy to find out where
these errors are on your
page and how to fix them.
So now that we've talked about
content and layout errors,
I'm going to give it back over to Tim,
who's going to tell you how to
find and fix JavaScript bugs in
your page using the inspector.
Thanks, Adam.
So a lot of you said you were
familiar with the Nightly Builds
or have downloaded one in the past.
And you might have seen a debugger that
we've had in the past called Drosera.
And you've probably used it and
filed a bunch of bugs about it,
I hope,
and shared your experiences with us.
And we've heard a lot of feedback
about that experimental app
that we've been shipping with
the Nightly Builds for a while.
And we've taken all that feedback that
you've given us and designed a brand
new JavaScript debugger that's now
integrated directly in the Web Inspector.
So it's exactly what all of
you have been asking for.
So let's talk about
this brand new debugger.
Well, it's fast.
It's a lot faster than
the previous counterpart,
the previous thing that
I was talking about,
Drosera.
And it's great.
It lets you break,
pause your program any time.
And here's what it looks like.
This is our debugging tool now
shipping in Safari Developer Preview 4.
Well, not really.
It does ship with
Safari Developer Preview 4,
but you've already used it,
you've seen it before.
The alert function lets
you inspect variables,
right?
But this is really what you're here for.
It's the brand new debugger built
right into the Web Inspector.
So let's talk about this
debugger a little bit.
It's great.
It's better than Alert.
It's better than Console.log.
Console.log is great too
for certain situations,
but it's not great for debugging.
No one likes instrumenting
code just to debug some problem
that they're running into.
And everyone knows JavaScript is a
finicky language and it has all these
different quirks that it has that is
very different than many other languages.
So it's great for no code
instrumentation debugging,
this brand new debugger that we have.
And it works with any production website.
So maybe you can't even
instrument your code.
You can still debug your
website using this new debugger.
And it provides a great amount
of detail that you can't get with
any other alert or console.log.
So let's show you how to get
started using the debugger.
And one of the items I skipped over
earlier is the Start Debugging item
now available in the Develop menu.
This is new in the
Safari Developer Preview.
And it lets you jump right
into the Web Inspector,
goes to the Scripts panel,
and starts debugging right away.
But if you don't choose this menu item
and you just open the Web Inspector and
go to the Scripts panel,
you'll see something like this.
And since our JavaScript engine
is the fastest out there,
we want to keep that way
for all the end users.
Even people that have the
Web Inspector turned on.
But maybe they're not
actively debugging JavaScript.
We don't want to have to
slow down the JavaScript.
And when I say slow down the
JavaScript just for debugging,
it's still fast.
Debugging with this brand new
Web Inspector is as fast as using
JavaScript as we shipped it in Safari 3.
So when I talk about slow,
Safari 3 was still fast in JavaScript.
So our debugger is great
even when you're attached.
Still, Safari 4 is lightning speed
compared to Safari 3's JavaScript.
So we give you an option
to start debugging,
and this adds those extra hooks
that the Web Inspector needs
to debug your JavaScript.
So just clicking the Start Debugging
button will reload your page
and enter those debugging hooks.
So let's go right into a demo.
So using this calendar app,
I was talking to Ada and Brady,
and they shared with me some
experiences while developing this
that they needed a debugger for.
And let's talk about that.
So I have a version of the calendar here,
and it's actually broken.
So I'm now on the broken calendar.
Well, it doesn't look broken visually.
All the events are showing up.
But let's take a look
at the Web Inspector.
So under the development menu,
we can bring up the error console.
The error console will just open the
Web Inspector and animate in the console.
Well, the page looks fine.
We didn't have any errors.
And we still don't have any errors.
So, let's figure out what's going
on and where my error went.
That's correct.
So my colleagues are telling
me I need to do a search,
and that's where the broken code is.
So let's bring up the error console.
We don't have any errors except for this
resource being interpreted as text HTML.
That's fine.
We can just ignore that.
So let's go ahead and search.
Let's search for Safari.
Oh, there's our error.
So now we have an error
count and one warning.
And right here in the console,
you can see our JavaScript exception.
And just like the markup errors
that Adam was talking about,
we give you a link right to the source.
You can click on that,
and it takes you directly to that
line of code in the resources
panel and highlights the line and
gives you the inline error bubble.
So thank you.
Great.
Glad you like that.
So I really don't know what's going on,
what's undefined here.
The error is a little vague
and the nature of JavaScript,
it can be really anything.
So let's jump right into the debugger.
Let's go to the scripts panel.
And start debugging.
So you notice the page reloads,
and now we're presented with all the
scripts that were loaded in that process,
in that page.
and they're available
from the pop-up menu here.
So this is the Scripts Panel.
I'll go over the various pieces
of the UI here in a second.
And one other item down here is
the Pause on Exceptions button.
And you can turn this on or off.
And whenever an exception is encountered,
the debugger will break and pause
and show you where that exception
is happening right when it happens.
So let's go ahead and
do the search again.
And there we are.
We're broken in the debugger.
And now the UI has really come to life.
Before you're paused,
it's kind of empty and boring.
And once you're paused on a statement,
you can see the sidebar has filled
in with a lot of information,
such as the call stack.
And since this is a callback
function from a database query,
we only have one function
in our call stack.
And below that,
we have all of the scope variables.
And since this function was
defined inside of another function,
it created a closure.
And those familiar with
JavaScript will know what a closure is.
It lets you get access
to the parent functions,
local variables that were in scope at
that time when the function was declared.
So you can see we separate
the different scopes.
So you have your local scope and
then you have your closure scope,
and that can keep chaining.
You can have multiple closures.
And then we have your global scope,
which you can toggle this open
and we keep it closed by default.
But you can see all of the
properties on the window object.
And we're inspecting this live.
These are the variables and the values of
all the JavaScript objects that are here.
And you can toggle these down
and see what's in these arrays
and deeply nested object graphs.
So we're here and I remember
it was complaining about
some undefined variable.
So I have a hunch that it might
be this function that we're trying
to call inside this callback.
The function,
the callback is only doing one thing,
so it has to be something like this,
right?
So we can evaluate stuff
while we're paused.
And sure enough,
this function is undefined and you
can't call an undefined function,
right?
What could this be?
Well, maybe the this object is undefined.
Well, this is a special variable
and it's never undefined.
It's always defined to something,
I believe.
And the this object,
the this variable is a magic function.
It changes and morphs around and
masquerades as different things.
And it depends on how the
function was called in JavaScript.
And in this case, it was a callback.
So you really have no control as a
developer of what the this object
is when your callback is called.
So you need, if you're going to access
external data or another object,
you need to have some other
way to access that instead of
relying on the this variable.
So, and you can also see what the
this variable value is over here,
and I evaluated it in the console.
And at this point in time,
it's the function,
it's the current function.
And that's not what we need.
You can see that this variable,
this object, doesn't have the function
we're looking for on it.
So let's go into Xcode
and see what we can do.
and open up our broken JavaScript.
And let's go down to the line of code.
Here's where we need to look.
So here's the line of code that
we're using the this property,
the this variable, I mean.
So since we have a closure
here with this callback,
we can define another variable
that we can access later.
So we can just say
variable self equals this.
And self is not a keyword in JavaScript,
unlike Objective-C.
So a lot of developers have worked
around issues just like this.
This, right?
Where they need some other name for a
variable that they're going to access
inside of one of these callback functions
or inside of a closure like this.
So we can now use self
in replace of this.
And that self variable is going to
be in scope because we're creating a
closure by using this callback like this.
So let's go ahead and save this.
This, this, this, this.
What this am I talking about, right?
So we've reloaded the page,
and we're still in the debugger.
After I've reloaded the page,
the debugger is still attached,
and it keeps track of you.
It updates the resources
as new scripts are loaded,
as evals are evaluated,
and they would show up in the menu.
And there's the same three
files I loaded earlier.
And break on exceptions
is still turned on.
So if an exception
would happen right now,
it would break right in the debugger.
So let's go ahead and
do the search again.
Safari.
Oh.
Well,
I don't have any data in my database.
So something has happened there.
There we go.
We still got the undefined.
Let's see where that's happening.
Well, that's curious.
So let's reload again.
and try our search.
There we go.
It was just a caching issue.
I should have turned off
caches in the development menu,
right?
Well, it looks like we fixed search,
but the debugger can be used
for a lot more than just fixing
code as an exception happens.
You might have never written any of this
code and you've been tasked to fix it,
right?
That happens all the time
in the development world,
right?
Someone else drops this big pile
of code on your lap and you need
to figure out how it works in
two days and ship it for a demo,
right?
I love this app and Ada did
a great job in writing this
demo for the previous session,
but I had no clue how it worked.
I'd never seen this code before.
So I was very curious of how the days
are populated up here on this chart.
So one feature of the debugger is
You can just click the pause button
and here's all the function flow
controls that we have available for
stepping and pausing and continuing.
Very similar if you have used XCodes
inline debugger that's available.
So we can go ahead and hit pause.
Well, it didn't pause, right?
JavaScript's not always running.
So until the next JavaScript execution,
we're waiting to have something
triggered so we can pause.
So the next time we click
one of these buttons or an
event fires or a timer fires,
then the debugger will inter-pause
the pause state and show you
the line of code where it's at.
Until then,
it's just waiting for a user event.
So let's go ahead and
click the next arrow.
And that triggered an on click.
As you can see in the call stack here,
And we're now paused in the debugger
and this on click has some script.
And you can set breakpoints by
clicking anywhere in the gutter here.
And very similar to any other
debugging interface you've
probably used in the past.
Well, let's go ahead and step in.
Step in.
Let's keep going and see if we
can find something interesting.
And you can see the execution
line update as I step,
and it changes files just
like you would expect.
And the scope variables will change,
though there's not much interesting here.
You saw a month title change.
Let's get into some interesting
code that we might figure out
how the day grids initialize.
So here, I just stepped into the
function initDayGrid.
So this sounds like
what I was looking for,
right?
I need to figure out how
this day grid is populated.
Maybe there's a bug I need to fix,
or I'm just curious about it.
So I don't want to step too much,
so let's go ahead and set a break
point and we'll go ahead and continue.
We've just stepped over all that code and
continued right to that point when the
execution happened on that line of code.
So now we have a bunch of
undefined variables still,
nothing really interesting here.
Let's go ahead and step over.
Now we're going to get
into this day grid.
Oh, wait,
something happened in the background.
Our calendar is no longer there.
I guess some line of code earlier
that I stepped over must have
removed the elements in that grid.
So it looks like this for loop is
going to populate the new days.
Let's keep stepping and it looks like
we're about ready to add the new day.
And sure enough, there it is.
So as you're incrementally
stepping through your code,
Safari is still there and updating
the rendering as new DOM elements
are added and resized and things.
So you can really see exactly what's
going on in between various big functions
like this init day grid where all of
a sudden the whole day grid is filled in.
but you don't know what
happens in between.
So let's go ahead and set
another breakpoint right here.
So this gets hit for every day grid.
And if you notice in the background,
it's going to be populating the day
grid as I keep clicking continue.
I keep hitting this breakpoint.
And you can see the local variables
are updating as I step through.
And everything that you're going
to expect from a debugger is right
here available at your fingertips.
So...
What if I want to experiment a little?
Debuggers are great with that, right?
You can inspect, but you can also change.
So let's go ahead and type i equals 20.
So now we've changed
the local variable i,
and you'll notice it
changed over here too.
So before it was like 3
or something like that.
Now it's 20.
What's that going to mean?
What's that going to do to our code?
So let's go ahead and disable this
breakpoint so the code just runs
full speed until we hit another
breakpoint or until we pause it again.
So we've now initialized
our whole day grid,
but it looks like my actions have
messed up the code a little bit.
We have hanging days and
an extra week we shouldn't.
So it really lets you see the
power and flexibility of the new
debugger that lets you experiment
and be more playful with your code.
And test out different
things that you might not try
otherwise without a debugger.
So let's go back to slides.
So that's the brand new debugger.
I hope every one of you goes and
downloads the new Safari 4 developer
preview if you haven't already
and try out the new Web Inspector,
including the debugger
I just talked about.
And like Adam said,
we're constantly improving these tools.
So any feedback you have on these tools,
you should go to the open source project,
file bugs, enhancement requests,
things you might like
to see in these tools.
Or if you're a handy web developer
and know JavaScript and HTML,
which who doesn't, right?
And if you're a handy web developer
and know JavaScript and HTML,
which who doesn't, right?
The Web Inspector is all
written in JavaScript and HTML.
That debugger is written
in JavaScript and HTML.
We debugged the debugger
as we were implementing it.
As it got further along,
we used it to debug itself,
which is... I don't even
know what that means.
So feel free to jump in if you
have any feature ideas or just
want to implement something.
We're always available on IRC to
talk about things that you might
want to implement or feature ideas.
So feel free.
So now I'm going to hand
it back over to Adam,
and he is going to talk about
improving page performance.
[Transcript missing]
So next let's talk about
high latency servers.
Web pages today are being served
from many different servers.
Many of them are outside
of your own control.
For example,
if you are embedding data from
Google Maps or something like that.
Now latency refers to the amount
of time spent between when the
browser first requests a resource
from the server and when data is
first received from that server.
And we've made this very easy to find
in the Safari 4 Developer Preview
and the Web Inspector.
So let's take a look at how to see it.
Now here we are in the
Resources panel again,
and we've selected the time
graph up in the upper left.
Now anytime you're
looking at the time graph,
you'll notice that the bar next to each
resource is divided into three parts.
This is a new feature in the
Safari 4 Developer Preview.
We have a beginning of the bar,
which is when the resource was
first requested from the web server.
The middle of the bar,
where we change from light to dark,
is when the first byte of data
was received from the server.
And the right edge of the bar
is when the last byte of data
was received from the server.
So for example,
in this long green bar in the middle,
we have a very long light area,
which means the amount of time
from when we first requested the
data to when we first started
receiving the data is very large.
And that's the latency.
The light part of the bar is the latency.
Now you can scroll through all of
your resources and try to eyeball
the one with the largest latency,
but we've actually made
it even easier for you.
Down in the status bar,
you'll notice that we have a menu that
lets you change the sorting order.
Right now we're sorting
by the start time,
but if we change it to sort by latency,
suddenly we have our resources
ordered in terms of the amount
of latency that transpired
while requesting that resource.
So the resources and servers
with the largest latency
will float right to the top.
Now you can see here that our
resources with the two highest
latencies are actually both
coming from an external server.
Now since the server is
outside of our control,
we can't go change any settings on it,
but perhaps we could do that.
We can do something to ensure that
these resources don't block the
loading of the rest of the page,
so that the user can start interacting
even before they've been loaded.
So now let's talk about having a large
number of resources on your page.
Each request that the web
browser makes to the page has
a certain amount of overhead,
the HTTP headers being sent with
the request and the TCP packets,
and there's also latency
for each resource.
So anytime you can reduce the
number of resources on your page,
you stand a good chance of improving
your page's loading performance.
And one particularly easy way to
reduce the number of resources on your
page without actually reducing the
amount of data it loads is to combine
small resources into larger ones.
So let's take a look in the
Resources panel at how we can
find these small resources.
So here we are in the
Resources panel again,
and we've chosen the size graph,
and we're sorting by size.
And now if we scroll all
the way down to the bottom,
we'll see all of our smallest resources.
Now you can see here that, for example,
this page is loading about five
or six very small CSS files,
and we could easily combine all of these
files into one and have a single resource
instead of the six different ones,
and similarly,
a single request instead of six requests.
So this is one good way to improve
your page's loading performance.
And finally, let's talk about serially
loaded resources.
Now, normally when the browser
is loading your web page,
it will request many
resources in parallel.
But there are certain situations
where this isn't possible.
For example,
if you have a resource that's
being loaded by some script,
the resource can't load
until the script has finished
loading and started executing.
So let's see how we might identify this
kind of a situation in the Web Inspector.
Here we are in the
Resources panel once more,
and we've selected the time graph,
and we've chosen a sort by start time.
Now here you can see that
we've got a lot of resources
that are loading in parallel.
We've got many CSS files loading at once,
many images loading at once,
and this is really great.
This is what you want to see
when your web page is loading.
It means that the browser is
parallelizing things as much as it can.
But if we scroll down to
the bottom of this graph,
you'll actually notice that
our very last resource,
this image down here, is waiting to,
it's not even being requested
until almost everything
else is finished loading.
And this gives us an idea that there
must be something that's holding
up the request of this resource.
Now if we look up above,
you'll notice that there's a
script resource that seems to
vaguely line up with this one.
And since both of these resources are
being served from the same server,
we can make an educated guess that the
script is actually causing the image.
To load,
and that's why the image isn't able to
load in parallel with everything else.
Now, once again,
these are the scripts and images
coming from an external server,
so we can't make any direct changes.
But if this were one of our scripts,
we could perhaps make the image be
statically loaded inside our web page
so that it would load in parallel,
just like any other image.
Or at the very least,
we could have the script start the
load of the image at the very beginning
of its execution so that the image
would be ready as soon as possible.
So those are some examples of how
to identify different kinds of page
loading performance problems in
the inspector and some suggestions
for maybe how to fix them.
This is stuff that's normally very
hard to figure out if you're using a
standard network tool like TCP flow that
shows you things at a very low level.
The inspector kind of breaks it down for
you at the level that you can understand.
So now let's talk about the
other side of performance,
which is JavaScript performance.
And for that,
I'm going to give you a demo.
So here we are back in the
calendar demo that Tim showed you.
Now I'm going to make sure that all of
our breakpoints here are cleared out
so that they're not getting in our way.
So let's see, we seem to be missing
our events once more,
so we'll get those back.
- Oh, I see,
we're in July where apparently
I'm not doing anything.
It's a big vacation.
So back to June where we have to work,
but we're here at WWDC and
it's really great.
So as Tim showed you,
one of the features of this
calendar is a search field.
And when you search for events,
you get a listing of the events
on the side that match the
text that you searched for,
and also each of the
events gets highlighted.
Now, back in previous months
when I was even more busy,
I actually noticed that when searching,
when I have a lot of events,
things can get a little bit slow.
And so I'd like to try to figure out
what's going on here and what's causing
my page to be slow when searching.
And to figure this out,
I'm going to use the inspector's
new JavaScript profiler.
So in the inspector,
we have this profiles panel
that I mentioned to you earlier,
and it will show you a profile.
Now here,
we've instrumented our code using the
console.profile and console.profileEnd
functions to instrument a section
of our script's execution.
And we've recorded a profile,
and we're seeing the
profile on the right.
Now let me show you where these
instrumented calls are so that
you can see what's going on here.
We're here in the process
query results function,
and we've inserted two calls.
At the beginning of the function,
we're calling console.profile,
and we're passing it a
title for the profile,
which you can see shows
up right in the inspector.
That's the name of the
profile we've passed in.
And then at the end of the function,
we're calling console.profile end,
which finishes recording the profile.
We're passing in the same title here so
the profiler knows which profile to stop.
You can have multiple
profiles running at once,
and this way the right
one will be terminated.
So in the inspector,
if you've ever used any of
OS X's standard performance
tools like Shark or Instruments,
this should look very familiar to you.
We have a number of columns here showing
you all of the information that you need.
On the right,
we have the function column,
which shows you the names of all
the functions called by the script
while it was being profiled.
And actually,
if you expand any of these functions,
you'll see all of the
functions that it called,
including functions that are
built into the JavaScript engine,
functions that I didn't even
define in my script file,
such as char at or index of.
Just to the left of that,
you'll see the number of times
each function was called.
And then we have the two time columns.
The total time column tells you how
much time was spent in each function
and all of the functions that it called.
And the self column shows you the amount
of time spent just in that function
without any of the functions it called.
So just in the source lines
of that particular function.
Also, down here in the status bar,
we have a percent button.
When clicked,
this will change the time from
being relative percentages
to being absolute times.
So you can really get a feel
for how much absolute time is
being spent in each function.
But for our purposes,
we're going to be looking
mostly at percentages.
So now since we're
sorting by the total time,
we can see the slowest functions right
up at the very top of our profile here.
And the very slowest one is
highlight events in calendar,
highlight event in calendar.
Now you can see that the self time is
36% and the total time is 57%. So this
means that almost all of the time
spent within this function is actually
spent in the function itself and not
any of the sub functions it's calling.
But let's see what
those sub functions are.
We've got three of them here.
Get elements by tag name.
Test.
And the regular expression constructor.
Now you can see that we're calling
each of these functions many,
many times.
So you can get an idea that this function
is doing a lot of work in calling
these functions over and over to try
to highlight this event in the calendar.
Now to get a sense for
the source code itself,
we've given you a hyperlink next to
each function that's defined in one of
your JavaScript files that will take you
right to the file in the resources panel.
So here it is.
We've clicked on the link and it's taken
us right to highlight event in calendar.
And we can get a feel
just for what's going on.
Now let's look at this.
This is an Xcode where the text is a
bit bigger and you can see it better.
And here is highlight event in calendar.
Now this looks like some pretty
standard DOM walking code.
We've got looking for all of the
unordered list elements on our
page and we're looping over all of
them and we're trying to find ones
that have the contents class name.
And then for each of those,
we're looping over all of the list
elements that it contains and we're
checking with a regular expression
that those list items have a
class that matches the name of
the calendar that this event is in.
And once we've discovered
that that's true,
we go on and check that the event
that the list item contains the
title that matches the events title.
And we're looking for events that are
not already highlighted and then finally
adding the highlighted class to them to
give them this nice yellow appearance.
So this is pretty standard code that
you might have in one of your web apps,
but we'd like to kind of speed it up.
Now, if you were here at the advanced
Ajax talk earlier this day,
you might have heard about a new
function that's on the document
that's called query selector.
All.
This lets you use CSS selectors to select
elements in your document and lets the
browser really do the heavy lifting
of this kind of DOM traversal for you.
So I'm going to try to rewrite this
function using query selector all and
see if we can speed things up from our
57% of total time that we have currently.
So query selector all is, as I said,
it's a method on the document and
it returns a node list that I'm
going to call items because it's
going to store our list items.
So we're going to call document
dot query selector all.
And its argument is a CSS selector.
So we want to just duplicate what
our DOM walking code was doing here.
So we're looking for unordered lists
that have the contents class and
we're looking for their children,
which are list items that have
a class name that matches the
calendar that this event was in.
So here we're dynamically adding
in the name of the calendar as
the class name of the list item.
And we're also looking for
list items that are not already
containing the highlighted class.
So we're going to search for one.
that aren't highlighted.
And so this is our query.
I hope that this will give us the
list items that we're looking for.
Now, as I said,
the browser is really doing
all the work for us here.
So we don't have to look for
all of the unordered lists,
and we don't have to check that
they have the contents class,
and we don't have to look
for their list items,
and we don't have to look that
they match the right class.
Now,
our selector here doesn't say anything
about the contents of the list item,
so I think we're going to
have to keep this code.
But it is checking that things
are not already highlighted,
so we don't have to check the class name.
And then we'll add the
class like we wanted.
Now, we need to loop over these items.
As I said, this is a node list
that we're getting back.
So we're just going to loop over
all of our items one by one.
And we'll store each one in a local
item variable since that's what the
rest of the code is already using.
And let me re-indent this so
it's a little bit easier to
see and delete our extra brace.
And so here's the new
version of our function.
So let's save this and see what
this does to our profile time.
Now remember,
highlight event in calendar was
taking 57% of the total time when
processing these query results.
So let's reload the page to try this
again and load up the new script.
And we'll pull up the search field.
And we'll type in
Safari just like before.
And you can see in the background the
profile got recorded automatically
by those console.profile and
console.profile end calls.
And if we click on it,
we can see that highlight event in
calendar is no longer the top function.
It's actually down here
in spot number three.
It's been reduced to 22% of total time.
So we've really made a big impact here
on the performance of this function.
And the profiler really
helped us to see how to do it.
So let's go back to slides.
Thank you.
So, you've now seen how to improve
your page's performance,
both with its network loading performance
and its JavaScript performance.
And you've gotten a big overview
of all of our developer tools and
particularly the Web Inspector.
We hope that you've seen that we've made
some big improvements in these tools
and that they've made it really easy
for you to debug your website right in
the browser without going anywhere else.
We hope you're really going to like them.
So we hope that you walk out
of here today by going home and
turning on the Develop menu from
the Advanced Preferences dialog,
easily debugging your site
using the Web Inspector and
the other developer tools,
and profiting.
If you need any more information,
please check out the
WebKit Open Source Project and the
nightly WebKit builds and contact
our technologies evangelists,
Vicki Murley and Mark Malone.
And now we'd like to open it up to QA.
We've also got some great labs.
There's an offline data solutions
lab and a compatibility lab coming up
right after this session downstairs,
so please join us there.